so I teach college students about
inequality and race and education and I
like to leave my office open to any of
my students who might just want to see
me to chat and a few semesters ago one
of my more cheerful students mihari
actually came to see me and mentioned
that he was feeling a bit like an
outcast because he's black he had just
transferred to NYU from a community
college on a merit scholarship and turns
out only about 5% of students at NYU
were black and so I started to remember
that I know that feeling of being an
outsider in your own community partially
what drew me to my work at my university
I'm one of the few faculty members of
color and growing up I experienced my
family's social mobility moving out of
apartments into a nice house but in an
overwhelmingly white neighborhood I was
12 and kids would say they were
surprised that I didn't smell like curry
that's because school is in the morning
and I had Eggo waffles for breakfast
curry is for dinner
so when mihari was leaving I asked him
how he was coping with feeling isolated
and he said the despite feeling lonely
he just threw himself at his work that
he built strategies around his grit and
his desire to be successful a mentor of
mine is actually dr. Angela Duckworth
the psychologist at UPenn who has
defined this stick-to-itiveness of grit
as being the perseverance and passion
for long term goals
Angela's book has become a best-seller
and schools across the country
particularly charter schools have become
interested in citing grit as a core
value but sometimes grit isn't enough or
especially in education so when mihari
was leaving my office I worried that he
might need something more specific to
combat the challenges that he mentioned
to me as a sociologist I also study
achievement but from a slightly
different perspective I research
students who have over
come immense obstacles related to their
background students from low income
often single-parent households students
who have been homeless incarcerated or
perhaps undocumented or some who have
struggled with substance abuse or lived
through violent or sexual trauma so let
me tell you about two of the grittiest
people I've met
Tyreke was raised by a single mother and
then after high school he fell in with
the wrong crowd he got arrested for
armed robbery but in prison he started
to work hard
he took college credit courses so when
he got out he was able to get a masters
and today he's a manager at a non-profit
Vanessa had to move around a lot as a
kid from the Lower East Side to Staten
Island to the Bronx
she was raised primarily by her extended
family because her own mother had a
heroin addiction yet at 15 Vanessa had
to drop out of school and she had a son
of her own but eventually she was able
to go to Community College get her
associate's then go to an elite college
to finish her bachelor's so some people
might hear these stories and say yes
those who definitely have grit they
basically pulled themselves up by the
bootstraps but that's an incomplete
picture because what's more important is
that they had factors in their lives
that helped to influence their agency or
their specific capacity to actually
overcome the obstacles that they were
facing and navigate the system given
their circumstances so allow me to
elaborate in prison Tyreke was actually
aimless at first as a 22 year old on
Rikers Island this is until an older
detainee took him aside and asked him to
help with the youth program and in
mentoring youth he started to see his
own mistakes and possibilities in the
teens this is what got him interested in
taking college credit courses and when
he got out he got a job with Fortune
society where many executives are people
who have been formerly incarcerated so
then he was able to get a Masters in
Social Work and today even lectures at
Columbia about prison reform and Vanessa
well after the birth of her son she
happened to find a program called
vocational foundation
they gave her $20 bi-weekly a MetroCard
and her first experiences with a
computer
these simple resources are what helped
her get her GED but then she suffered
from a very serious kidney failure which
was particularly problematic because she
was only born with one kidney
she spent 10 years on dialysis waiting
for a successful transplant after that
her mentors at Community College had
kept in touch with her and so she was
able to go and they put her in an Honors
Program and that's the pathway that
allowed her to become accepted to one of
the most elite colleges for women in the
country and she received her bachelor's
at 36 setting an incredible example for
her young son so what these stories
primarily indicate is that teaching is
social and benefits from social
scaffolding there were factors pushing
these two in one direction but through
tailored mentorship and opportunities
they were able to reflect on their
circumstances and resist negative
influences they also learned simple
skills like developing a network or
asking for help things many of us of us
in this room can forget that we have
needed from time to time or can take for
granted and when we think of people like
this we should only think of them as
exceptional but not as exceptions
thinking of them as exceptions absolves
us of the collective responsibility to
help students in similar situations when
presidents Bush Obama and now even Trump
have called education the civil rights
issue of our time
perhaps we should treat it that way if
schools were able to think about the
agency that their students have and
bring to the table when they push them
what students learn can become more
relevant to their lives and then they
can tap into those internal reservoirs
of grit and character so this here my
student mihari got accepted to law
school with scholarships and not to brag
but I did write one of his letters of
recommendation
and even though I know hard work is what
got him this achievement I've seen him
find his voice along the way which as
someone who's grown up a little bit shy
and awkward I know it takes time and
support so even though he will rely a
lot on his grit to get him through that
first year law school Bryant
I'll be there as a mentor for him check
in with him from time to time maybe take
him out to get some curry so that he can
keep growing his agency to succeed even
more thank you
[Applause]